my name is Dennis Pogue I'm the vice
president for preservation here at Mount
Vernon and were out visiting the site of
the south coast south grove trash midden
and we found the mid back in nineteen
ninety and it was by accident which is
often how archaeologists find
archaeological sites the operations
folks here were getting ready to install
a sprinkler system and so they dug a
series of holes all the way across the
lawn surrounding the mansion where they
were going to set the sprinkler heads
and when they did that they dug a small
hole right here about a foot and a half
across and they almost immediately found
all sorts of artifacts so we knew
immediately that they had found
something that was associated you know
with the Washington household so we told
him stop don't do this anymore and we
came back and we investigated the hole
and decided that it was so interesting
that we were going to come back later
that year and we spent parts of four
years excavating in this area and what
we uncovered was about a 25 foot in
diameter pretty shallow only a couple
feet deep at its deepest point
depression in the ground I don't know
what caused it possibly there was a
large tree here that blew down and
created created the depression and the
Washington's used it as a handy place to
throw their trash in the 18th century
you know you didn't have trash trucks
coming around to take away your refuse
so you had to deal with it the best way
you could and typically what you did was
you deposited you know sort of an
out-of-the-way areas it holes and maybe
abandoned sellers or even wells on
occasion and filled it up with domestic
refuse we excavated here and found over
that over the course of that time over
120,000 artifacts and then another
30,000 animal bones so it's still one of
the largest and most important
archaeological deposits that we've
excavated here at my burning
so this actually is the whole this is
the location of the hole that was dug by
the grounds crew and that's where those
first artifacts came from so we came
back at a later date and we expanded
this area and wound up opening an area
that's about 30 feet by 30 feet across
and what we found was that we there was
a large pit here in the ground and the
blue paint that we have used here shows
you the outline of where the midden was
located and again recovered over a
hundred thousand artifacts this is just
like the initial sure that we found for
the punch bowl and we found all these
additional shirts and you can see that
they actually mend together to give us
part of the base of the punch bowl
itself and you can get a sense of the
type of decoration that it has it's
really quite a magnificent piece and
it's the only one of its kind that we
have found on the site so it turns out
to be a pretty unusual fund in addition
to domestic objects we also found lots
of other materials you know that were
generated here including plaster we know
that in 1758 George Washington did some
major renovations to the house including
removing all the plaster from one of the
downstairs bedrooms and replacing it
with wooden paneling and so we found
hundreds and hundreds of pieces of the
plaster you can see it's got a flat
surface that would have been the wall
surface and it's rougher on this side
where it was pushed back against the
wall to attach it to the sides of the
a structural materials tools and again
food remains animal bones pieces of cow
and pig and sheep fish bones again all
whole variety of materials oyster shells
of course the folks are eating oysters
and other shellfish at the time you
found crab claws so this is exciting
because of course by looking at this
material we can get a better sense of
the foods that are being eaten how
they're preparing the cuts of meat and
getting a better understanding of the
daily food ways of the options in the
plantation